fix: test removing preview features from keycloak startup (#2838)
defenseunicorns/uds-core: docs/operations/release-notes/1-10.mdx

---
title: UDS Core 1.10

> description: UDS Core 1.10 keeps Keycloak FIPS mode enabled by default while requiring explicit configuration for additional Keycloak features.

Reviewer: very weird description here. why are we feeling the need to call out fips mode is still enabled in release notes??

Author: cleaned this up

sidebar:

>   order: 3.985

Reviewer: this should be a draft before the actual release notes are crafted probably? this is going to publish once we merge to main (or i guess when docs site rebuilds).

Author: added draft mode

### Notable features

- **Explicit Keycloak feature selection:** UDS Core always enables the required `fips` feature and exposes the `keycloak.keycloak.features.additional` value for additional features. UDS Core no longer passes `preview` by default, which prevents newly added Keycloak preview features from activating during a UDS Core upgrade. See the [identity and authorization configuration reference](/reference/configuration/identity-and-authorization/#keycloak-features).

### Dependency updates

This feature change does not update a runtime dependency.

## Upgrade considerations

### Keycloak database and session behavior

> The 1.10 upgrade does not downgrade the Keycloak database. Keycloak remains on version 26.7.0, and its schema migrations remain applied. Disabling stateless mode changes how volatile authentication data is stored; active login sessions and action tokens may not carry over and users may need to authenticate again. Durable data such as realms, clients, users, roles, and identity providers remains in the database.

Reviewer: feels very weird to call this out.  almost makes me more concerned on this upgrade? does this provide anything useful here?

Author: i can word this better. Primarily the database was what changed in the recent preview feature so wanted to specifically note that this removal of preview features wouldn't cause any issues with the database.

### ⚠ Breaking changes

| Change | Impact | Action required |
|---|---|---|
| UDS Core no longer enables Keycloak's generic `preview` feature group by default. | Keycloak preview features that UDS Core previously enabled indirectly, including `stateless:v1` in Keycloak 26.7, remain disabled unless you configure them explicitly. | Review deployments that rely on preview features. Add the specific feature names to `keycloak.keycloak.features.additional` before upgrading, or add `preview` only when you intentionally require every preview feature. |

### Notable features

- **Explicit Keycloak feature selection:** UDS Core exposes the `keycloak.keycloak.features.additional` value for additional features and no longer passes `preview` by default. This prevents newly added Keycloak preview features from activating during a UDS Core upgrade. See the [identity and authorization configuration reference](/reference/configuration/identity-and-authorization/#keycloak-features) ([#2838](https://github.com/defenseunicorns/uds-core/pull/2838)).

### Dependency updates

This feature change does not update a runtime dependency.

## Upgrade considerations

### Keycloak session behavior

> Keycloak remains on version 26.7.0, and the upgrade leaves its schema and durable data unchanged. Realms, clients, users, roles, and identity providers remain intact. Because stateless mode is no longer enabled by default, active login sessions and action tokens may not carry over during the transition, so some users may need to authenticate again.

Reviewer: nit: can we just keep this to the point? I am very confused by the wording here and as an external user I would be a bit confused what the takeaway is here

```suggestion
Because stateless mode is no longer enabled by default in this release, active Keycloak login sessions and action tokens may not carry over during the upgrade. Some users may need to sign in again.
```
